There it is.
I'd just like to see the first one stuck.
Okay, number one.
Okay, well, if you don't mind, I would just like to have a general conversation.
Sure.
And at some point, after I really get immersed in what's going on, maybe we can get together for some more specific... Sure, absolutely.
Because right now, I'm just totally feeling my way into this.
Uh-huh.
And I guess the idea of writing a history, a centennial history of a university press, you know.
One thing I did say this morning, which I found very useful, was that he thought that a press could be defined by the tenures of its directors, that each director probably leaves a certain kind of a stamp on it, which opened it there.
Do you agree with that, do you think?
I think that's true in the case of this press, because the tenures have been so long, and they've covered significant periods.
It's basically three people in a hundred years.
Well, there you go.
Do you think this is an interesting way to approach it?
Yeah, I really do.
And I think, to a considerable extent, that they also mark different eras in publishing and the life of the university and the way books are published and so on.
Especially if you consider Chester Kerr's tenure to date from before he became director.
the key player at the press even before that, so he gets up to whatever it is, you know, thirty-something years, and his is, I think, a pivotal tenure.
Do you think he regarded it as his little fiefdom?
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
Le Prêt c'est moi.
I mean, there was no question about that.
Yeah.
I said, you know, this is pretty interesting.
He said, I'm quoting him.
He said, well, he's very full of himself.
He had a lot of style.
Yeah, he was... You're true of quoting Morgan?
Quoting him directly, yeah.
Okay.
Well, I mean, you could have been quoting a lot of people, but yeah.
Well, he was too egocentric to make the most of the press in his view.
I'm not asking you to say yes or no on that, but...
He gave you a little instance of the Franklin papers, and I'll have to listen to the Ted to get the precise name, but an individual who was working on a blog.
He wanted to bring him in on the board.
And he said, why?
He said, that's like bringing in the hired help.
He said, it is bringing in.
It's difficult.
It is bringing in.
Don't quote me on that.
I said, sure, don't worry about it.
I'm not here to.
This is a celebration of the press.
Right, right, right.
But it is interesting.
I think it would behoove me to get a sense of the character.
Well, I mean, he was a huge personality.
And you might have seen his...
picture at the press, and there he is with his guardsman's moustache and so on, and his tremendous, actually really tremendous presence.
Ed's right, enormous ego.
And I think probably did, to some extent, get in the way of making even more of it.
He was a brilliant promoter.
That's important.
Yeah.
And he was, I've got a few footsteps there.
I'm starting out with sort of a negative.
You know, you follow somebody who's been there for 25 or 30 years, and then you spend another 25 years.
You know that.
You know a lot of that person.
And the promotion, he was promoting himself as much as the press at any one time.
And sometimes it was great for the press, and sometimes I think it got in the way.
Was the press at that point, do you think, an instrument of the university, or was it that?
No, it was not.
And I think the most important, probably the most important thing he did was, the press at that time was an instrument of its, or had been an instrument of its founder, George Day, and it was not part of the university.
It was a separate
wholly owned corporation that had various links to Yale, but in fact was not a part of the Yale corporation at the university's technical name.
Well, it started out that way.
How did Yale allow its name to be used for private enterprise?
Well, the days were Yale graduates.
They were well-heeled.
They were doing a good thing, and he set it up that way, and within a year of
his setting up the press, he came to Yale to be treasurer of the university, and I think probably nobody just noticed very much or minded that it was set up as a private corporation.
He raised a lot of money for Yale, and he raised a fair amount of money for the press at the same time.
They tell me he spent mornings in the treasurer's office and afternoons at the press.
And for all of those years then, from 1908 on, and
through the early post-war years, it remained a private corporation.
Now, there were always Yale people on the board and so on, but it had its considerable institutional independence.
And in the, you know, Chester had once planned to write about this, and he never did, but, and I don't know if there's maybe anyone left alive who could tell the whole story, but
Um, the man in charge of the press was a rather weak, um, director, um, prior to Chester.
Prior to Chester.
And the actual control of the press, I'm talking about the sort of early 50s now, I think in 48 or 49, and there had been a fellow there, um, who was called the editor.
And he was the strongest person at the press.
It'll come to me.
And Chester had come to the press after writing
Go ahead, I'm just checking.
After writing a book, which was a sort of survey of American University presses, the first thing he did after the war, I guess, and this guy was really pretty much calling the shots and saying what was to be published and so on, and he was a very, very early, well, what was later called a neoconservative, taking the press in a considerable direction to the right,
At one point, he had set up a series of books that were underwritten by one of the giant oil companies.
Really?
Yeah.
What were those books about?
No, I can't, because I think— Were they political type things?
Yeah, they were political, yeah.
a group within the faculty much aware of this and wanted to do something about it, wanted to take the control away from this person and move the press editorially in a different direction, and also to bring it into the orbit, as they like to say, of the university.
And the man who was critical in there was a member of the history department who later became the president of the university, and Whitney Griswold.
And the struggle for the sort of heart and soul of the press went on through the 50s.
And at that time, in addition to the director of the press, there was this
editor, and that was his title, I believe, and Chester Kerr was there and he had a title that was something like secretary, in which he acted more like a kind of grand vizier to the sultan.
And he pretty much engineered or orchestrated the connection with Yale, and when it came down to it,
This other guy left, the director retired, Chester became the head of the press, and at just about the same moment,
the press became a part of the university.
And there was one other thing driving it at the time.
And this was in the fifties?
And by that, it was the late fifties, but when it finally happened... So really, it was a private entity for... It was a private entity for... Yeah, that's right.
The other thing that was pushing it into the university's orbit was that the city of New Haven
was trying to tax the press, and so it also had the shelter that it wanted.
But I think that was the most important thing that happened then, and it, Chester brought it into the orbit of the university, and he made it, after that, a professional operation, and it hadn't been.
So you'd describe it, perhaps, as an amateur operation?
Yeah, I really would.
A clubby kind of thing?
It was, it was, the whole thing was run for most of those years by, uh, this, uh, good old boy who was the treasurer of the university.
Now we can't remember his name off.
Yeah.
Well, no, George Parmley Day was the guy who ran it, but, but the, uh, George, right?
George Parmley Day, D-A-Y, was the man who founded the press.
Parmley, P-A-R-M-L-Y.
P-A-R-M-L-Y.
Yale, class of, I believe, 97, and he was the brother of Clarence Day.
And, uh,
George took a job on Wall Street working for his father, who, if you remember the book or the play, was the governor of the New York Stock Exchange, and they started the press, and George and his wife, and Clarence, the three of them working together, just started it in a little room.
Eventually, within maybe a year or two, George was asked to come to Yale to be treasurer, and he brought the whole thing.
I see.
What did they do, just a few titles to begin with?
Yeah.
They probably did eight or ten titles even that first year.
And some of what they published was extremely good.
You're just anticipating my question.
But there's something you should do.
Next time you're at the press and you carve out an hour or more, you can walk the history of the press on the shelves of the library.
The books are actually shelved by publication date.
That might even be a good opening scene.
Yeah, it might indeed.
And you, if you, you know, start over on the far left and there it will say that first year and there are the books.
that were published, and actually you'll find on a shelf above them a number of titles that were published with the name Yale University Press on them before there was a press, and they were published in honor of the time of the university's centennial, just a few years before that.
So the name was on there.
But there they are, and you can look at
1908, 1909, and so on, and just follow it right on through.
So what's the oldest university press in North America, would you say?
Harvard, I would imagine, or Hopkins?
No.
Johns Hopkins is.
And it goes well back to the 80s, I guess.
So it's a fairly recent phenomenon here, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
Harvard claims to have had a small press
which was really a printing press that Henry Dunster, one of the early presidents of Harvard, had in the 17th century, but it didn't last very long.
The last few days press, I mean, the sound book, I suppose, was then.
Yeah, yeah, that's right, that's right.
Back in 1638 or whatever.
Yeah, and Cornell had a press in the 1860s, but it folded, and they didn't start up a new one for a generation or more.
Well, Cambridge had 500 years.
Exactly, yeah, yeah.
So it was very new.
And it pretty much dates from the presses, the university press movement, pretty much dates from the sort of professionalization of scholarship in this country, the sort of first generation of scholars, most of whom were German-trained or were trained on the model of German universities.
Daniel Coit Gilman of Johns Hopkins was a leader in this.
And the presses were started, in fact, to provide a publishing outlet for these new professional scholars who were not historians like Parkman and Prescott who were writing for a broad general audience, but for writing more for their own colleagues and so on.
And by the 90s, some of the presses that are still great today were
were founded, Chicago, California, Columbia, and so on.
And a lot of them, in a number of cases, the disciplines grew up around the presses.
That's particularly true of the University of Chicago, where they started a press that had a journals and a book publishing division.
And William Rainey Harper brought people in, and he said, oh, I want you to do philology.
What's philology?
Well, Ed this morning, I asked him, I said, do you think that the press generally, vaguely, kind of followed the curriculum in a way?
And he said, no, he didn't think so.
But you would say differently.
I'm speaking historically, and it's true.
I think what's, in more recent years, the university presses have published
Largely in, with a few exceptions, largely in areas where what's written is published in book form rather than in journal form.
So the enormous growth of the natural and physical sciences created a whole
industry of publishing grew up around that, and the university presses don't do that, but they stayed largely in the humanities and the sort of softer of the social sciences.
And another thing that he told me today, which surprised me too, I didn't realize it, I would have thought that one of the functions of the Yale University Press or Harvard University Press or Princeton, any of these other major academic presses is to
publish the product of research of your faculty.
And he said, no.
And in fact, it's probably tougher for a Yale faculty member to publish with the press.
To a considerable extent.
Not that it is tougher, but you actually really wanted the balance, and you were looking for important work, number one, not necessarily an outlet for your faculty.
And maybe you could talk a little bit about that and how that is.
Well, okay.
History is an example, I think, of a kind of a field where the leading figures in the field, and Morgan would be a perfect example, but you could name a dozen other just at Yale, who could publish anywhere?
In fact, in his case, do.
And do, yeah.
Do, yeah.
Peter Gay, or C. Van Woodward, or... Jonathan Spence.
Jonathan Spence, or all around, yeah.
Harold Bloom.
Yeah, I mean, the list is enormous, and so they can go anywhere.
The press at Yale competes to publish their work, and...
One of the things I did when I came was try to recapture some of them.
So you made that a project?
I did, yeah.
Well, it was, at that time, surely the greatest history department in the country.
And we got some of them.
Give me some of your favorite victories, your favorite triumphs there.
Well, I suppose the first and most important one that I landed was Jerry Pelican.
And I had known him somewhat when I was at the University of Chicago.
And he had been there before coming to Yale, and I think almost certainly his most important book, his five-volume, History of Christian Thought, was published by the University of Chicago.
But I got...
got him back to the list, and he could probably have gone other places, but this also happened at a time when trade publishing was changing.
And Jerry had been published most recently by Harper and Rowe, and his very, he was
close to one man there, a man named Melvin Arnold, who was the, um, he started as an editor, actually, at Beacon Press in Boston, and then went to Harper, and, um, he, he was Hugh's mentor, um, and he started the, uh, Harper Torch List, which for many years was that really fine paperback imprint, and, uh, he went on up, up through the ranks, and, and, um,
for a brief period of time, was president of the company, and Jerry told me once, he said, Mel said to him, I want to publish everything you write, every kind of book you write, whatever it is, we'll, you know, we'll do it, because it's first-rate stuff, and Harper's had always had a strong religion and history list, and so on, and so it was going to fit.
Well, it didn't happen, and
the company was, like, first became Harper and Roe, bringing and buying the educational part, and like all of these companies, it was struggling to compete in a changing world and in a world where book companies were becoming larger and larger and needed more money to be effective and competing and so on.
And Harper was unable or unwilling to
find room on their list for a pelican.
He was briefly sort of the academic advisor to the entire house.
Yeah.
That's actually where I got to know him.
I was the history editor there for a while, and shortly after Mel Arnold left, a wonderful man named Winn Knowlton came in.
He was a financial guy.
He wanted to do things right, and he asked Jerry to come, and he said, why don't you
do something with the editors of the press.
And Jerry said, well, I'm giving a seminar at Yale on Gibbon.
How about if I gave it for the editors?
And so, okay.
So I joined the seminar, and I spent a wonderful six months reading Gibbon, and we'd met every week, and somebody would give a paper.
It was a real seminar.
and so on, except that we met at the Century Club and with the fancy food and so on.
It was very nice.
And so a few years later when I came to Yale, I said, we could publish you in a way that I think that Harper wanted to, that we could deliver, we could give you a broader audience and so on, and also would be to do a really proper job of publishing the serious books.
And I guess we must have done 15 books together overall, but the breakthrough one was Jesus Through the Centuries.
Yeah, it's a great book.
It's a great book.
And he actually came to me one time, and he said, we were having lunch here, walking back from August, and he said, he said, I had a proposal from the Reader's Digest, and they wanted me, they wanted him to do a
Big, broad book on Jesus.
They didn't specify.
And he said, well, you know, I've been thinking all my life about doing a book like this, and it wouldn't be like that.
So they said, write a proposal.
And they paid him.
This is Reader's Digest.
Reader's Digest.
They paid him, I think it was $25,000 just to write a proposal.
This is Reader's Digest.
Yeah.
And he, and this is, this is 1980 or something like that.
And so he wrote it, and they were horrified.
They survived.
Our people can't understand this.
You know, this is too complicated.
That is funny.
Read his digest, getting something that's sophisticated.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, they just didn't know what the hell to do with it.
So he told me, I said, well, wow, we'll publish it, and I'll find some more money, and we'll do that.
And they just said, keep the money, forget it.
And so he said, well, this is really what I'd like to do.
And then he worked out a deal.
The university set up a lectureship.
It had all sorts of elaborate lectureships, all involved bringing in scholars from outside, but they set up one where they would actually have their own people come and give a lecture course, as it were.
And it was hugely successful.
And this was designed with bellicent mind, to be sure.
He said, this is what it's going to be.
Jesus through the centuries, and it's going to be 20 chapters, or how he had sort of planned the whole thing out.
And they created a kind of course which was open to the public as well as to students anywhere.
Long before the internet, too.
Yeah.
Opening it to the public.
Yeah, no, just people coming off the street.
So we went, I remember he told me, he said, the first lecture's going to be at the Law School Auditorium, which is a big,
venue, 1,200, 1,400 seats, something like that.
And then I remember he called me a couple of days before and he said, we're oversubscribed.
And so for the entire 20 weeks, whatever it was, that he gave that course, he gave the lecture twice in succession.
Three o'clock and four o'clock, or four o'clock and five o'clock.
And every time there was a thousand or more people there.
And he talked about this.
How do you explain this?
Was his celebrity such that this— Well, I think it was a—first of all, it was a seductive topic.
And yes, I mean, he was extremely well-known.
That's 2,000 people a week.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, this is something.
And they were coming from considerable distances.
And—well, I mean, hundreds of them were students.
And they also met in sections and did other things.
He had teaching assistants.
But most people, like me, I just sat there in the front row and heard this stuff that I had never heard before.
And he's a compelling lecturer.
I mean, he's a dramatic and exciting lecturer.
And did the text pretty much parallel the lectures?
Absolutely, yeah.
I mean, I was reading the chapters.
Is that right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It was very close.
But that was terrific that you attended the lecture.
Oh, well, I was a senator, too.
I mean, not that I had any... So how early in your tenure did this happen?
Oh, in the first few years, yeah.
So that's really fabulous.
Yeah, it got me off to a running start, and it was a very successful book, and...
Like, roughly.
I mean, I'll find it.
I'll get the numbers, but what would you guess?
Oh, I don't know.
It probably sold hardcover.
Maybe it sold 30,000 or 40,000.
Ed Morgan told me today of the 15 or so books that he's written, he's done two for Yale.
But the best-selling book of all time that he's had is his Benjamin Franklin book.
Yeah.
100,000 copies.
Right, right.
And I said, wow, that's a fabulous sale.
I said, is that the best-selling book in Yale history?
He said, no, not even close.
No, not even close.
And he named a book for me that I'd never heard of before, that had sold probably a million copies.
I got the title here someplace.
I'm curious what he tells you.
Right there, I'm going to find it.
Hold on.
indulge me here.
Yeah, sure.
The Lonely Crowd.
Oh, yes.
Absolutely.
That is one of the... Which I've never heard about the book.
It's a sociology textbook, apparently.
Well, no.
Well, not really.
David Reisman wrote The Lonely Crowd in the early 1950s, and it was a book that first posited this
inter-directed and outer-directed, the way people are, and so on.
It's a turgid, difficult book to read, but it sold fabulously.
And he went on to a long career as a sociologist at Harvard, and so on.
But it was published in an exotic little series, monographs, on something or other in, I think, 1950.
I used to have in my office one of the first
copies of it.
And I think the first printing was 1,500 copies.
And it sold, and it sort of staggered everybody.
It kept selling and kept selling.
And about the time that it had sold 400,000 or 500,000 copies, it was licensed to Anchor Books, Double Day Anchor Books, which was the first trade paperback, quality paperback imprint.
And they sold about 5 million copies.
And then the press got the rights back and sold another 700,000 or 800,000 copies.
And you never heard of the book today.
No, but it was widely read from the 50s through the 70s.
Was it influential in any way?
I think it was, yeah.
That's astonishing.
The press has had other million copy sellers as well.
For instance?
Eugene O'Neill's Long Day's Journey and Tonight.
You guys published that.
Yeah.
Wow.
There's another story there.
And that sold a million copies?
A play sells a million copies.
Well, it was required reading in all of those undergraduate courses on American drama or American literature and so on.
That's the trick, get that thing assigned to the classrooms.
Another story, and you will encounter it if you ask about that book.
Um, Eugene O'Neill was first published by, um, uh... Bonnie and Libwright, I think.
Horace Libwright.
And, um, uh, who was a really exciting and interesting publisher of the 20s, and, you know, he went belly up at the beginning of the Depression and... Published beautiful books.
Yeah, very nice books.
And, and, uh, and he published some wonderful people.
But he was a terrible businessman, and he was always in debt.
And one of the young people who worked for him and who bought a share of the company in the 20s was a kid named Bennett Cerf.
And a few years after he joined, he wanted to go in on his own.
And Cerf said to Liberite, I'll help you out.
I'll find you some money.
I will buy your reprint series, The Modern Library.
And he bought The Modern Library, and it became, of course, The Modern Library.
It became the foundation of Random House, though, of course.
And O'Neill came, uh, uh, I think there was already some O'Neill plays on that, on the Modern Library list, and later when, um, uh, Liveright went under, um, Serf
got O'Neill and a fabulous editor who came with him, who O'Neill wanted, and he stayed with him.
And they, all those years, published, and when O'Neill died, he had given all of his papers to the Yale Library, and the understanding was that
his last plays, especially this one, which was so autobiographical, were not to be published for a little, considerably, not to be produced for a considerable period of time.
And Cerf was prepared to honor that, but the widow, O'Neill, an actress named Carlotta O'Neill, wanted the plays published, so, and produced, so the famous Circle on the Square production thing, and then Cerf said, well,
pledged to Gene and I wouldn't have published it.
Well, if that happened today.
And the books came to Yale.
That's a great story.
Yeah.
That will definitely get into this.
Well, you know, and, and, and, I mean, I think Bennett Cerf was a very great publisher, and, and he, he was a man of his honor, but the press ended up publishing the last four plays, um, um, which included, which, of course, this great play, but also included, um, um,
Touch of the Poet, and I think it's Moon for the Misbegotten, and a little one-act play called Huey.
And they published those over the years, and about ten years ago, somebody counted it up, and it was about the time of the last really big revival on Broadway with Jason Robards and Maureen Stapleton, and we had sold a million copies of the book then.
And so on.
And we published, we issued a new and corrected edition, because some scholar had found some lines.
So that extends the copyright, too, doesn't it?
Yeah.
He wrote in hard pencil, like a number one, a number three pencil or something like that.
if it was Carlotta or somebody, whoever typed from that, simply missed the line.
And it's the line that says that what you had to guess before, which was that, in fact, she's taking drugs.
It's right there in the handwriting.
Yeah, it's clear.
I mean, it was supposed to be a line in the play, and it's never mentioned.
You just have to kind of... So is that the only...
significant difference?
That's a major difference.
And it's certainly enough to give you a different edition of the book.
Yeah, it was.
And so on.
Of course, through all of those years, we had the literary property, not the press.
But the university was the repository of all of the rights.
And so, whoever it was, Samuel French, every time somebody did the play, they had to rent the things or buy the things from them and so on.
I think those are the two million copy-setters in our... Well, that's a great story.
Yeah.
How about stuff like Lefty Lewis's stuff?
I mean, that's kind of subsidy publishing in a way, right?
Absolutely.
That would have just been the kind of thing that happened in that earlier regime, right?
Well, it did, and it continued to happen.
I mean, it's a little bit like publishing the Franklin Papers, in a way, except that Lefty paid for everything.
Well, that's a...
Well, I wonder if the Lamarth Lewis papers would have been published otherwise.
Absolutely not.
And their scholarly—I'm sure they're important, but I'm dancing around in circles here.
I love Lefty Lewis.
He was a bibliomaniac.
Yeah, I know.
And it was done because he wanted it done, and he was willing to pay for it, and it was
They were beautiful.
You'd seen them, you know.
I met him and visited with him at the great library.
I wrote about it in my first book.
Of course you did, yeah.
Well, I remember being with him.
But it's one of the kinds of things, this whole gentleman atmosphere that's going on.
Exactly.
And of course, Chester loved that.
That's actually the way he'd pay for the whole thing.
He'd pay for everything.
There was a lovely man named Louis Martz, who was a professor of English here, and he took me up to meet Lefty, and he said, you know, they were fascinated by this.
He was a very old man, quite ill at the time, but he took us into his inner sanctum, you know, and he held
a copy of, Walpole's own copy of something that the Pope had written in.
You know, look at this, look at this.
And he said, I feel faint.
I have to lie down.
I mean, it's just so exciting.
I just wish I had that story.
That's the kind of story that I would have used.
Yeah, he was fabulous.
And, you know, we had lunch, and the Irish maid in the uniform comes in, and the whole, the whole thing, it was just like something out of another century.
But Lefty, well, you probably don't make the connection.
He was also, for quite a number of years, the so-called senior fellow of Yale, meaning the chairman of the board of trustees.
Yeah.
Not as significant.
And he, Louie and others told me stories.
He said he thought nothing of calling the president of the university at 8 o'clock in the morning because something wasn't right, and he wanted it fixed right away.
And he was always, and he called me at all hours of the day, send a copy of my
whatever, something of his, to this library, because you know what he was doing?
He was tracking down the original copy that had actually been in Walpole's possession, so he had a copy of something else that he'd gotten somewhere else, so he would say, so-and-so library, we'll do a swap, and then you give them, you know, the set, the 60-volume set.
It's one of these things you had to do.
And that's like Lloyd Coats today at Princeton, I mean, with that great
a great library of children's books that Princeton really didn't want.
You know, I've written about it.
Yeah.
Tuck me out of school here.
Everybody knows about it.
But he's like the number one trustee and probably the most generous benefactor in the history of the university.
Right.
So this person speaks and says, I want to put up a children's library.
Yeah.
Well, all right.
No one has a single course in children's literature taught at the university.
You do it.
But, you know, he...
Could be worse.
Could be somebody who wants football, right?
I mean, you know.
Yeah, well, I think it's wonderful.
It is wonderful.
So, I mean, these— Anything that does what he did with books and— With books and— How could that possibly, you know— And the books had to be just so.
You know, it had to be real gold.
That's right.
Yeah.
And this—and the cloth—you know, no corners.
Cut no—he paid for everything.
But there's a man whose name you'll run across as you read the press files named Ralph Brown.
And Ralph Brown was a professor of law, and on the various presses' boards for many, many years, and copyright law was one of his fields, and so on.
Marvelous guy.
He, when he got out of the, no.
When he graduated from Yale in the late 30s, he briefly worked on the Walpole Project and met his first wife there.
And he told me that Lefty paid all the salaries and benefits of all the editors who worked on those things from about 1930 to 1990.
Wow.
Or 1985, whatever it was.
So for a couple of generations, that's what he was doing.
And so what he paid for the publication costs was a fraction of the total cost.
He was paying X number of salaries a year.
Amazing.
So it's worthwhile.
The books are there.
They're very important.
Yeah.
Would you have done it without that sort of connection?
Not likely.
Couldn't have.
One of the things that Yale and all the other presses struggled to do was to maintain and continue to publish all of these grand series, like
the Founding Fathers series.
Yeah, and I do want to talk about that, too.
Yeah, yeah.
Because that really is something that only university presses are doing.
Only, yeah.
I talked about this.
We did, we did on the phone.
Yeah.
And you even wonder if that's going to survive a long haul.
I don't think it will.
We had to let some go, or say to them, we can only do them if you can
find some other kind of support somewhere.
And when the first of the Founding Fathers series began in the 50s, there was a lot of money to support them.
There was some government interest and whatnot.
And the Jefferson papers particularly, and the Franklin papers, they saw the lead ones there.
And they knew they were going to be terribly long and so on.
a good deal of support, and the book sold very well.
Very important point.
Everybody had to have the father's glory.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, the fifties, of course, was also a time with a huge expansion of education in this country, higher education especially, and spending on education, and libraries were, college and school libraries were growing, and something like that.
And in the early days, could sell
2,000 or so of each of these volumes.
For the Franklin papers, probably now sell six or seven hundred now.
They're just as big, they cost just as much to do, I mean more in dollars, but I mean they're very expensive and so on, and there are many fewer copies to spread the costs over, the price goes way up, and
And they're not buying.
So, I mean, there are thousands of incomplete sets.
And why aren't they buying, do you think?
Well, I think it's this... The same thing happened to the scholarly monograph.
The federal funding for higher education was cut at the end of the Johnson administration, and that, in fact, was financing the purchases
the library purchases, and when it was pulled out, there was a terrible downward spiral.
First of all, all the publishers got hurt because they had inventory they couldn't sell, and then they cut their print runs, and then they put the prices up and spinning.
At the same time, libraries were especially college and university libraries,
were beginning to spend ever larger portions of their acquisition budgets, first on the sciences and then on, and that meant journal purchases.
Do you mind if I shoot a couple pictures, by the way?
Yeah, sure.
Go right ahead.
Yeah.
Then on journal purchases and then finally on technology.
So today, I don't know what.
It might be something like 25 cents of a university library
budget goes to buying books.
It's not a dedicated budget as it used to be in the old days.
Exactly.
Right.
So what happens?
How many volumes in the Franklin, roughly how many volumes in the Franklin series would you say?
I don't know, 60 or something.
Yeah, I mean, I'll shoot.
It's still going.
I mean, it's still going, yeah.
I'm trying to remember, I was on the board for a long time.
Franklin's already in France.
He's
I think they can finish in 12 or 14 more volumes.
But at Princeton, the Jefferson papers are so far behind that they have a two-track deal, and they think it's going to take 25 or 30 years to publish all of that.
Of course, he lives as long as Franklin does and so on.
You like the butler?
Or the cat?
I've got a cat that I have for 10 years, and he had a twin sister who ran away, and they're looking
Almost that cat reincarnated.
Really?
I've yet to see another cat that just looks like my old Ivan, instead of taking a picture of Peter Martin.
His name is Joe.
Yeah.
Perfect.
So, um... I got the butler, too.
You got the butler, too.
Yeah, right.
The biggest challenge, I think, that all of the university presses face from the mid-'70s on
was how to make a go of it, because selling the books that they were publishing wasn't paying for the cost of doing it.
And some of them never recovered.
And a few of them went out of business, but a lot of them scaled down, and they just couldn't handle it.
At Yale, it was certainly the biggest challenge that I faced.
Not just the editions, Franklin and so on, and Yale published fifteen or twenty of them.
They were all different kinds and so on.
But any kind of standard monograph, the revised dissertation that gets published or the first important book, one of the ten-year books and so on.
It wasn't working, so ways had to be found to bring in enough income to keep doing that, but something else had to be done.
Did you, a word that's, I don't want to overuse it, but did you have this, who was it, which of our presidents called it the vision thing?
Did you have a vision for the press when you
When I came?
Not an accurate one.
Not one that I followed.
Let me just preface that by saying that the Yale University press operates in the black now, too.
It may be unique among American... Very close.
Very close to it.
Without giving up the mission.
So if you could just give me a little riff on that.
Yeah, well... We did it by making the...
The list, the entire list, pay for itself.
That is to say, the mix of books, which is what Harper and Row does, HarperCollins does.
Thank God.
Yeah, and add a... Because they've got Michael Crichton, you know?
Yes, exactly.
They have Michael Crichton, and they have cookbooks, and they have children's books, and so on.
So the mix of things is what works, and that's what I...
set out to do, and I toyed with the idea of doing something with journals, because I'd come from Chicago, which had a strong journals program, but it was clear that it wasn't possible to do that at Yale, so it was then by what I said something like, what I wanted to do was enrich the mix of books, and we did it in several ways, but one of them was to get
the very same scholars who wrote the monographs to write bigger books on broader subjects.
Jesus Through the Centuries is a perfect example.
And in those books, if and when they reached a larger audience, and with Jesus Through the Centuries, for example, it wasn't just that
That book sold 25,000, 35,000 copies.
We then sold the paperback rights for $100,000 to Harper.
Later, we published an illustrated edition of it.
So it was, those were commercial things to do.
Later on, he wrote a companion volume, Mary.
In fact, I wrote a review of it for my Christmas roundup a couple years back.
Did you?
Yeah.
Because it was a nice, beautifully illustrated book.
Yes, the illustrated book.
Absolutely, the illustrated Mary.
I mean, we did the, so, did that, and we,
began to publish in sort of earnest some textbooks, building on a strength, the pre-existing strength.
And they did very well.
And, and this is most important, at the same time the art and art history list that was largely published out of our London office began to grow and get very strong.
It's the strongest kind in the world.
I don't know another publisher that does
And our book, Abrams, forget about it.
Forget about it.
And who else is there these days?
There's only Abbeville, but yours are just... Abbeville.
Are they still around?
Barely.
And that is the work of one man, basically one man, John Nickel.
Somebody I must meet.
And I can give you the...
50 cent sketch.
John Nickel was an editor at Oxford University Press.
Solid, came from a very comfortable upper middle class background.
Grew up in Kendall in the Lake District.
Went to Winchester
then Balliol, Oxford.
John would be about 61 today, something like that.
He was interested in art and interested in publishing, and he took a job at the press at Oxford, right there in Oxford.
And he did a very unusual thing.
He said he wanted to be able to control the quality of the production quality of the books that he did.
So instead of just working as an editor, he worked in what they call the engine room, the production department at Oxford, to learn what it is you do to make a book and get it to look right, something that really
that any editor has a feel for.
And the greatest example in American publishing of an editor-publisher who learned all of that and made beautiful books was Alfred Knopf.
And John Nickel won better in this regard because he took on the much more elaborate business of publishing art books.
And he was also the protege of one of the brilliant senior people at the press.
And so he got to do a lot of interesting things, and he was doing very well at Oxford.
And in the early 1970s, the Paul Mellon Center for British Art, which operated in London,
had taken on the job of publishing some art books.
And do you know the British Art Center here in New Haven?
It's the sort of, it's counterpart.
And it's also a Mellon Project.
And they... They brought the Stubbs pictures from Worcester.
Yeah, right.
A million bucks for Worcester for these drawings they didn't even know they had, you know.
Fabulous stuff.
But this was Mellon.
And so they published a catalogue resume, I think it was of Gainsborough, and they might have done one or two others.
And they began, the Mellon Center in London was losing so much money on publishing those books that even Mellon said, Boston, you've got to do something about this.
But it's hemorrhaging that much.
Yeah, it's hemorrhaging.
They had a negative gross market.
I mean, they were sort of, for every dollar that the book sold for, they lost two or three.
You know, it was just staggering.
So the press had its little overseas office in the same building.
I forget, not Bedford Square.
Anyway, one of the squares around there.
They turned to Chester and said, you know about publishing, could you do something to stop the hemorrhaging?
And he said, let me see what I can do.
And he decided to hire somebody.
Well, he found John Nickel and said, take over these publishing projects and fix them.
He did.
And then he said, well,
All right.
Nickle was very good, said, you know, okay, I'm doing that.
And I got him under control.
Now I, you know, I think, let's do something else.
And within a few years, he had built a superb program of original books.
So what's the trick?
How does he take something that's hemorrhaging money and turn it into?
Well, I mean, I realize it's almost impossible.
It's not, but it's not smoke and mirrors.
I mean, he...
You brought a business model to... Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And he said, I can get better quality typesetting
here, get it sooner and on time than what you're paying for, and I can get the book printed over here, the color work done over here for a better price, and you start doing that, you get the author under control, and you get the stuff in when it's supposed to be done, and, you know.
There was this perception that Uncle Paul was probably always going to pay for it.
Sure, sure.
And they didn't know what to do.
And it's a difficult
There aren't too many art book publishers, because you can lose your shirt if you get it wrong.
And so he was very shrewd and savvy, very smart, very hardworking, very tough.
And he had two early successes, and one was a book that just sort of landed in his lap,
by Elizabeth Murray, and it was the story of the Oxford Dictionary called Caught in the Web of Words.
That's a great book.
It's a lovely, lovely book.
Terrific book.
Um, but he had previously, he had, um, published at Oxford, um, a man named Mark Girouard.
Sure.
Yeah.
And Mark had written a book called The Victorian Country House, and it was published— Nice little illustrated book, right?
Well, but it was not the—it was—but it was, um,
It had a handful of colored plates and something else.
And John told me later, he said, when it was published, after it was published, he and Mark, they said, you know, there's a better way to do this.
And this book wasn't right.
And he wanted to try it again.
So when he got to Yale, he invited him.
He said, get the rights back from Oxford.
And I'm going to reissue it.
And what they wanted to do was completely integrate the illustrations in the text.
Much more complex.
Every page has to be laid out, and the type has to fit, and so on.
But it's doable.
And in the midst of that, Mark got the assignment to give a series of, I think they were called the Slade Lectures at the National Gallery.
And so they decided to try it with that book instead.
And that book was called Life in the English Country House.
And it was a huge success.
It sold, I think it was 50,000 or 60,000 copies, and that was just when I was coming to Yale, and it was Chester's last hurrah, and it was the week before I started, paperback rights were sold to Penguin for 100,000 pounds, and it was really moving.
Well, John—
And John started to build an art list really from there, from that beginning.
So this particular division, if you call it, that is kind of a triumph of the London office, isn't it?
Absolutely.
So that really does behoove me to pay attention to it.
Yes.
You could not tell the history of the other university press in the last 30 odd years without talking about London.
It was terribly important.
For a while, it was the press's cash cow, and it was
turning back money through this, largely through this successful art publishing program that allowed us to reinvest again and to grow and so on.
And John was a very big partner.
Is he in the UK or is he here?
He's in the UK.
He left the press about two years ago.
He was the, he was called the editor when I came and a few years later I made him the
head of the whole operation over there, the managing director.
And they went on to have a number of very considerable successes and whatnot, and the thing grew and grew and grew.
And John had met a woman at Oxford named Frances Lincoln, and they married.
She had her own publishing company, and it was very successful, a very commercial operation.
And they did lots of illustrated books, children's books and so on, a lot of co-editions.
So he's working with his wife now?
Well, no.
So I'm jumping ahead.
His wife, I think it was four years ago, his wife caught pneumonia and died suddenly when they were up in the Lake District, and he was 54, something like that.
And he was devastated, and then he took over her company, and for a while he ran both
operations, and then he finally pulled out and said he had to devote full time to that company, which he inherited.
He did it again, by the way.
Her company had been very successful, but it had fallen on hard times, and it was deeply in debt, and they had huge staff that they couldn't afford, and the banks were ready to foreclose, and in two years or three years, he turned it around, and it's in the black now.
Boy, a miracle worker.
And he's doing wonderful.
He's a great publisher.
And you people will be able to put me in touch?
Yes, absolutely, yeah.
Because I'll be going either later this year.
Oh, terrific, terrific.
I have to do it.
Yeah, you do.
You could not understand it.
I mean, it is, and there is no other American university press that has anything like it at all.
So the fact that this, that Yale has this major arm that is itself a
It's a British publishing company, and it's thought of that way.
This includes also the books that you put out for the Metropolitan Museum and now the Art Institute of Chicago.
Yeah.
Well, a lot of that was, of course, done here, but it was the same idea.
It was following his model.
Oh, he did so many wonderful things.
So where did the dedication to the visual come from, or did that just kind of happen?